---
layout: post
title:  "Masks"
date:   2020-10-30 23:04:00 +0100
categories: posts
---

I think that mask wearing in the current pandemic is an issue that didn't need to be an issue. It's gone from badly handled at the start, to a disaster as we head into the second (third in the US) wave. 

At the very beginning it was almost a textbook case (if such a thing exists) of a "we lied to them for their own good" situation backfiring in an almost epic way. And I don't need to even cite any references, or other articles to prove anything, because this is just a self-evident fact to everyone who is on the 'regular person' side of politics; I don't know what we can call that side of politics, other than to say that's it seems to be orthogonal to all the other sides. 

All of us on the orthogonal side of politics feel like we got burned, and with good reason. All of the talking heads and writing hacks parroting the same message when people started getting sick: "masks aren't necessary/useful/practical/available/etc./etc." And let's face it, it was a seductive message! No-one wanted to wear masks in Western countries (except for some with specific cultural backgrounds), it was weird and uncomfortable and just felt wrong even to consider it. I think there's almost an antisocial vibe to it when you first put on a mask.

It was all a bit of a joke to see someone with, for example, an east asian background wearing a surgical mask in a public place. We had learned from 'experience' that flu-like viruses coming out of asia in the past had been big overblown false alarms. Pig flu, bird flu, SARS: huge publicity, UN warnings, media hype, then some guy down the street feels sick for a couple of days and that's the whole experience in a nutshell. Big deal. Masks are for hypochondriacs.

So the "masks aren't needed" message was already preaching to the converted, we didn't need to be told twice. We didn't thnk too hard, certainly didn't feel the urge to challenge the WHO or whoever else. Then Italy was hit hard, and we felt a bit weird, but maybe they just had a whole bunch of visitors from China, probably a one off. Slowly it became obvious that we'd all have to deal with it, what can we do? Brains everywhere, not accustomed to pushing back against 'authorities', start switching out of coast mode. Wait, why not masks? Exactly? Wouldn't it make sense to block the respiration carrying a repiratory-related disease. 

I think that was around the point a lot of us started feeling a bit like suckers. "N95 masks are too difficult to put on properly." Er, wait, what? How hard can putting on a mask really be? "Masks only protect the other people, not the wearer." Er, hmmm, wouldn't that cut transmission by like 50%?. "Virus will stick to the outside of the mask and..." You remember. 

And then it became political, because in a polarised world (particularly a polarised US), if the other side believes it, it has to be wrong. 

And so now, we have lockdowns almost before mask wearing! It's essentially costless to the economy, a mild source of discomfort that you generally get used to, a simple piece of cloth that we've had over 6 months to churn out in ever increasing numbers. It should literally be the most basic thing that everyone does now. Wear a mask, wash your hands, preserve social distance. Why even talk about lockdown when these behavioural changes that cost nothing can be increased to varying levels, requiring only a strong government stance? 

I call BS on all the excuses, hand-waving, "lack of science" etc. The powers-that-be thought we'd run low so they lied, and it was a massive own goal. And I'm sure it wasn't a lesson learned but history will almost surely regard it as quite ridiculous.